---

category: blog
by: Dick Wall
title: Minutes from Aug SIP/SLIP Meeting
---

## SIP/SLIP Meeting, Aug 20th 2015

### Video of Aug Meeting
[Video of Aug meeting](https://plus.google.com/u/5/events/cfh933nkhhq0pe7h23c9v4csk6o)

## Opening Matters
This is a short post, it has been superseded by the September minutes but is included here for completeness. What follows is just a brief outline of what was covered, for the full record, please see the video above.

[Erik Osheim](https://github.com/non) was invited to serve on the SLIP committee and this was his first meeting. Erik will be known to many in the community as, among other things, a member of the Typelevel organization and a primary contributor to cats in addition to his work on spire and very, very much more.

[SÃ©bastien Doeraene](https://github.com/sjrd) has also been identified as a desired member of the SLIP committee, in particular to represent Scala.JS interests. He will be invited to serve.

## SIP/SLIP Summary

A number of SIPs and SLIPs were considered, with the following decisions:

* [Either and the larger Validation library questions](https://github.com/scala/slip/issues/5) are large enough to merit the formation of an expert group to discuss the options. Bill Venners has volunteered to coordinate the group.
* All existing SIPs and SLIPs were captured in [github issues](https://github.com/scala/slip/issues) for tracking.
