---
layout: blog
category: blog
by: Martin Odersky
title: SPLASH Amsterdam and Higher-kinded Types
---

Two weeks ago I was in Amsterdam, where we had the Scala Symposium as
part of the SPLASH conference. I gave a talk at the symposium and then
later on a keynote at the main conference. I had a great time, staying
in a hotel on one of Amsterdam's lovely canals and commuting by bike
to the conference center. Amsterdam is a fantastic city for
biking. Each day I picked another route along a different canal, and
the route generally could not be long enough for me (I missed a couple
of talks because of that). I noted that it's important to always stick
to the traffic rules, for instance to give way to traffic coming from
the right, or you would get into an accident between two bicycles;
there are so many of them around.

SPLASH is a set of conferences running together (OOPSLA being one of
the main ones), so you get exposed to a variety of topics and get to
talk to people from many different areas. One talk that stood out for
me was Simon Peyton Jones speaking about how they are reforming the UK
curriculum to teach computational thinking to kids from primary school
on. It's been Simon's main "other" occupation besides Haskell and he
gave a fascinating talk that conveyed his great enthusiasm for the
cause of teaching computing the right way to every kid. His message
was that we have to act now, when things are waiting to be defined. A
quote: "We know we have failed if, 10 years from now, the outcome is
just that every kid can code Java".

At the Scala Symposium I spoke about how we implemented
higher-kinded types in Dotty. This was a long and often painful
journey. In total we tried four different approaches. Each of them was
an effort of many weeks -- sometimes several months -- to implement
the new scheme, debug it, and then finally discard it because we found
out it was too hard to get right, or did not otherwise live up to
expectations.

The original reason for trying so many different avenues had to do
with DOT, which is intended to be the foundation of future Scala. DOT
as-is has no provision for higher-kinded types, but it turns out
that a restricted version of higher-kinded types can be
straightforwardly encoded in it.  That issue is not just academic
because the _dotty_ compiler uses DOT's constructs as its core data
structures. So what is hard to do in DOT tends to be hard to implement in
the compiler as well.

Originally, we played with the idea to restrict higher-kinded types to
just the kind of partial applications that can be conveniently
encoded in DOT or _dotty_. The main problem was that this would have
forced us to restrict the Scala language. More advanced idioms, such
as type classes for `Monad` and `Functor` would have required rewrites
and would not be as convenient to use. The boundary between what was
expressible and what was illegal was also not very intuitive. For instance,
one could define an abstract polymorphic subtype of `Map`s in the usual way:

    type M[K, V] <: Map[K, V]

But one could not define a type where the parameters were reversed. I.e.

    type M[V, K] <: Map[K, V]

would have been illegal.

To address these limitations, we then played with two more complicated
encodings of higher-kinded types in _dotty_'s core types. Neither of
these worked out very well so in the end we settled for the "brute
force" approach of adding higher-kinded types without trying to re-use
most of the core. All these attempts are described in the paper
[Implementing Higher-Kinded Types in
Dotty](https://infoscience.epfl.ch/record/222780/files/p51-odersky.pdf).
The talk was not recorded but I have uploaded the
[slides](http://www.slideshare.net/Odersky/implementing-higherkinded-types-in-dotty).

Another interesting development was that after the talk I got together
with Sandro Stucki and Guillaume Martres and we hashed out a slight
extension of DOT, which would make it much more convenient for more
advanced dependent type programming and, as a side effect, would make
it quite suitable to express higher-kinded types as well. If this
works out it would be a case where compiler hacking influenced the way
we do theory. It's usually more efficient to do theory first and
implement it systematically once it's done, but sometimes going from
practice to theory is the only route available.
