---

category: blog
by: Jon Pretty
title: Lars Hupel Joins the Scala Center Advisory Board
---

It has been almost half a year since we kicked off our first Scala Center
Advisory Board meeting in New York. With a board primarily made up of
commercial sponsors, we decided then to offer Bill Venners the role of
community representative, and Bill has ably filled this role in the two
meetings so far.

But since then, the sponsors have grown to nine, and to maintain a
proportionate representation for the community on the board, we decided — with
the sponsors' unanimous agreement — to invite a second community representative
to attend and vote in meetings.

We decided to offer the choice of candidate to
[Typelevel](http://typelevel.org/). This was a reflection of the incredible
work Typelevel have done to nurture a friendly and open community of
functionally-minded Scala users around a number of open-source projects. Their
work is focussed around the Cats, Shapeless and Spire libraries, but has grown
to include over a dozen other libraries, tools and compiler plugins, all with
a shared philosophy.

Typelevel have been instrumental in helping to grow the Scala community, and
the functional elements within it, through regular hacking sessions, and with a
number of workshops and unconferences colocated with larger Scala events.

So we felt it was only appropriate — given Typelevel's influence, its track
record, and the philosophy of welcomeness it shares with the Scala Center —
that they should choose the second community representative to the Advisory
Board.

When we spoke to Typelevel, in typical style, they opened [a GitHub
issue](https://github.com/typelevel/general/issues/42) to discuss the
invitation, to decide whether to accept it, and to choose a representative.
We're very glad that they accepted, and selected Lars Hupel to sit on the Scala
Center Advisory Board alongside Bill.

Lars has made a number of significant contributions to the Scala community in
the last few years. His open-source contributions started with work as a
maintainer of [Scalaz](https://github.com/scalaz/scalaz), but he has since
worked on the code verification tool, [Leon](http://leon.epfl.ch/), and
[libisabelle](http://lars.hupel.info/libisabelle/), which facilitates
interacting with the proof assistant, Isabelle, from Scala. All this experience
gives Lars a deep understanding of Scala, both as a language and through some
of its the most advanced applications.

The Scala Center shall be very happy to welcome Lars, as one of the founders of
Typelevel, to the Advisory Board, and at the next meeting (currently scheduled
for late November) we shall put his appointment to the existing membership for
approval. We have every expectation he will be a valuable asset to the board!

