---
layout: blog-detail
post-type: blog
by: Martin Odersky
title: "From Dotty to Scala 3"
---

Now that Scala 2.13 is around the corner, it's time to consider the
roadmap beyond it. It's been no secret that the work on Dotty that my
group at EPFL did over the last 5 1/2 years was intended to explore
what a new Scala could look like. We are thankful for the help we got
doing this from Lightbend, Scala Center, and outside contributors. We
are now at a stage where we can commit: Dotty will become Scala
3.0.

Of course, this statement invites many follow-on questions. Here are
some answers we can already give today.  We expect there will be more
questions and answers as things shape up.

_When will it come out?_

  Probably shortly after Scala 2.14. At the current release schedule, that means towards the end of 2019, or possibly early 2020.

_What is Scala 2.14 for?_

  Scala 2.14's main focus will be on smoothing the migration to Scala 3. It will do this by defining migration tools, shim libraries, and targeted deprecations, among others.

_What's new in Scala 3?_

   The currently implemented language changes are listed in the [Reference section on the Dotty website](http://dotty.epfl.ch/docs/).

_What further changes are expected?_

  You can follow the current status on the issue tracker and pull requests of the [dotty](https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty) project on GitHub. Around the corner are opaque types ([SIP 35](https://docs.scala-lang.org/sips/opaque-types.html)), which are ready to be [merged](https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/pull/4028). We are working on replacing implicit classes with a more natural and intuitive [extension mechanism](https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/pull/4114). We also expect some important additions in the areas of meta programming, generic programming, and, possibly, effect typing.

_What's the next big step_?

  For the moment, we are still held back by the requirement to cross-compile. To build the `dotc` compiler, we first run it through `scalac` and then let it compile itself. Hence, we cannot use yet any Scala 3 constructs in the `dotc` codebase itself. This situation will change once we bootstrap from a stable Dotty version. Besides letting us "eat our own dog food" this will also make it easier to merge some additions such as support for generic tuples ("HLists").

_When can I try it out_?

  You can start working with Dotty now. See the [getting started guide](http://dotty.epfl.ch/#getting-started). Dotty releases are published every 6 weeks. We expect to have developer previews for Scala 3.0 in the first half of 2019.

_What about macros_?

  Stay tuned! We are about to release another blog post specifically about that issue.

_How can I help_?

  Scala 3 is developed completely in the open at [https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty]. Get involved there by fixing and opening issues, making pull requests, and participating in the discussions.

