---
layout: blog-detail
post-type: blog
by: Jon Pretty
title: "Towards A Brighter Tooling Future for Scala"
---

# Towards A Brighter Tooling Future for Scala

Scala has, for its entire existence, been on the back foot with its tooling
support. This was true when the language first arrived in 2004 as little more
than a command-line compiler, through 2010 when Typesafe's (now Lightbend's)
push for commercial adoption took an early focus on improving the Scala IDE for
Eclipse, through to today, as the tooling experience is very much improved
thanks in part to the work of JetBrains on IntelliJ, but still lags behind the
tooling support some other languages enjoy.

People care about language tools, and it says a lot for Scala that its success
has come without ever having had the best tooling. But a better development
experience in other languages has always made their grass seem greener, and
over the years has undoubtedly limited the adoption of Scala.

Now, in 2018, there have been some developments primarily outside of the Scala
community which present an new opportunity to change that.

## The Language Server Protocol

The language server protocol (LSP) initiative, started by Microsoft, but
already seeing wide adoption, is a language-agnostic protocol for allowing
tools which consume information about code ("clients", such as IDEs) to
communicate with compilers and other tools which can provide that information
("servers", or as the protocol describes them, "language smartness providers").
The LSP proposal has had early successes and has collected a lot of momentum
behind it. So it's no surprise that there's already a lot of enthusiasm within
the Scala community around the idea.

During discussions in the last Scala Center Advisory Board meeting, one of the
Scala Center sponsors proposed that the Scala Center could support the
initiative, so we scheduled a meeting in January to get the ball rolling.

With a many players from both commercial and open-source backgrounds already
involved in tool development for Scala, we wanted to make sure that all the
developers who had already contributed significantly to Scala's tooling could
attend, but without having so many attendees as to make the meeting
unmanageable. So we privately invited about fifty people, mostly suggested by
the Advisory Board members.

This "closed doors" approach for the initial meeting was a practical
compromise, made just for this one-off meeting. There are certainly other
people in the community who have contributed to tooling who didn't get the
chance to attend. To those we overlooked: sorry! we certainly want to include
everyone who cares deeply about Scala's tooling, but it wasn't possible to run
a meeting with more than about thirty attendees.

## The Initial Meeting

The goals of this first meeting were, nevertheless, modest.

Firstly, with a number of different existing Scala tools which could play a
part in Scala's LSP story, almost nobody in the meeting was familiar with them
all, so to get everyone to a common understanding of the ecosystem, the largest
part of the meeting was spent hearing different tool authors speak about their
tools, and how they might play a part in the jigsaw.

Secondly, we wanted to decide upon what our next steps should be, and how the
Scala Center could help the initiative. This was a task of setting up a
framework in which decisions about the Scala LSP initiative could be made in
future, in a way which the majority of people supported.

During the meeting, we heard presentations on
[Scalameta](http://scalameta.org/) and SemanticDB,
[scalameta/language-server](https://github.com/scalameta/metals),
[Bloop](https://github.com/scalacenter/bloop),
[SBT](https://www.scala-sbt.org/),
[Pants](https://www.pantsbuild.org/index.html), [Bazel](https://bazel.build/),
[Ensime](https://github.com/ensime), [IntelliJ
IDE](https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/), [Scala IDE](http://scala-ide.org/),
[Dotty IDE](http://guillaume.martres.me/ide_paper.pdf) (Visual Studio Code),
and [TASTY](http://goo.gl/Mn6EhH).

Another important premise for the meeting was that the tooling should be, as
much as possible, compiler-agnostic. That is to say, we should need to use
a different protocol to work with Scala 2.11 or 2.12 or Dotty, and nor should
users receive a different front-end experience for any Scala-like language.
This support for other compilers is important for two reasons, even though the
vast majority of current users run Scalac.

Firstly, compilers like Dotty and [Rsc] want to hit the ground running with
their tooling support; waiting another decade for a new tooling ecosystem to be
invented is not an option.  When the time comes for Scala users to upgrade to
Dotty, nobody wants the additional barrier of having to upgrade their build
tool, documentation tools or IDE at the same time. They want a seamless
transition. That's much easier to achieve by considering other compilers *now*
than would be later.

The second reason is that there is a huge amount of excitement and enthusiasm
around these new compilers, and we want to channel that into the Scala LSP
initiative, and take advantage of the commitment from these other developers to
pull together towards a common goal.

In the meeting we heard representations from the project leads of the Scalac
compiler, Dotty, Rsc and Hydra about any unique features of their compiler
implementations that might have any bearing on the LSP initiative.

We didn't have time during the meeting for much detailed discussion, though the
attendees talked about a number of ideas and concerns around what shape the
initiative should take and how it should proceed. One distinction that was
clear throughout the discussion was the need to separate a Scala implementation
of the LSP (the protocol as described my Microsoft), from a more general "build
server protocol" which would allow for the exchange of other information
specific to Scala-like languages, like dependencies and classpaths, and this
is reflected the main outcome of the discussion.

Minutes for the meeting are available in the
[scalacenter/tooling-working-groups
repository](https://github.com/scalacenter/tooling-working-groups/blob/master/meetings/2018-01-17/minutes.md)

## Next Steps

I made a proposal during the meeting that the next steps should include the
election of two working groups to take forward ideas for an implementation of
LSP for Scala, and a second "protocols" group for defining other non-LSP
protocols for Scala. These groups should have,

 - 6-8 members in each
 - some overlap in membership between the two groups
 - a mix of experts (more experience than free time) and enthusiasts (more free
   time than experience)
 - diverse representation of a variety of existing projects
 - at least one member from the Scala Center

As an open-source project, the dynamics of a disparate collection of developers
is often better suited to innovation than shipping working software by a
deadline, and a large part of the challenge will be to keep everyone on track,
despite the freedom that Open Source grants us. We hope that that leadership
can come from the Scala Center.

## Becoming a Working Group Member

Sitting as a member on either of the working groups is an opportunity to
participate and influence an exciting area of development for Scala, and will
be a position of some respect and privilege. But bootstrapping these groups in
a way that is fair is harder than it might at first seem: the nature of our
initial meeting meant that not everyone could be involved, but we do not want
to exclude anyone from the opportunity to sit on these working groups.

We feel that it is very important to include a combination of experience and
energy in both working groups, so whilst the expertise of their members will be
essential to their success, a willingness to participate and contribute are
also extremely valuable selection criteria, and anyone lacking experience but
having a strong desire to be involved and dedicated to the cause should not
hesitate to seek candidacy: that commitment will be very valuable to the
working groups.

Candidates to the working group should be nominated by opening a pull request
to the [scalacenter/tooling-working-groups
repository](https://github.com/scalacenter/tooling-working-groups), following
the [instructions described
here](https://github.com/scalacenter/tooling-working-groups/blob/master/nominations/README.md).

## Election Process

If the Scala community had a list of its members, we could invite each member
to vote on the working group members, but of course, that's not how the
community works. Equally, we do not want to open an election up to anything
that could be so trivially compromised as an online poll.

We will therefore take an imperfect but pragmatic approach and open voting only
to those members of the Scala community who are willing to devote a small
amount of their time to participating in a series of live votes, conducted
online, which will take place on Wednesday, 28 February at 6pm GMT. Full
details of the process will be published here, soon.

I will be giving a keynote about the future of Scala Tooling at [Scala
Sphere](http://scala.sphere.it/) in April, a large conference in Kraków
dedicated to making Scala developer tools better, now in its third year. I hope
to be making some exciting announcements there about our prospects for vastly
improved tooling support for Scala! Meanwhile, the working groups will have a
challenging task ahead of them, but with a their collective experience, the
energy and enthusiasm Scala's tooling contributors, and the support of the
entire community, we can be more optimistic about that future than ever before.






