---
layout: blog-detail
post-type: blog
by: Martin Odersky
title: "Community and Communication"
---

The Scala language is a big tent. It supports object-oriented and
functional code working together. The point of Scala was always to
show that these paradigms can be combined in a compact set of unified
language features. But while the language design stresses unification,
the same cannot (yet?) be said about the community of Scala
programmers.

In fact, Scala is used in many different ways. There are the people who
use it as a "better Java" with more powerful object-oriented features,
and there are the people who use it as a "poor man's Haskell",
concentrating on the purely functional language subset. And then there
are the many in between who use it in a predominantly
functional style with an object-oriented module structure, without
being too dogmatic about it.

I see this difference of approaches as a big opportunity. There are so
many great ideas to debate and opportunities to learn from each other!
Lots of these ideas feed into the design of Scala 3, with the overall
goal to make Scala's integration of paradigms even tighter than it is
now, as well as making it simpler and safer.

Unfortunately, sometimes a competition between ideas becomes a fight
between people promoting them. This can happen in the heat of debate,
but we have to draw a line where personal attacks become persistent,
where others are ridiculed or where statements are distorted intentionally.

None of this should be controversial.  But if such behavior occurs
what should we do about it?  And who even is "we"? If we take all
Scala users together, the answer is: there's nothing to be
done. Everybody can use a programming language and communicate about
it in the way they see fit. If we take us as individuals, the answer
is that we can and will stop interacting with people whose behavior we
object to. If we talk about organizations such as the Scala Center, or
Lightbend, or Typelevel, I believe they also have the right and
sometimes the obligation to take a stand. First, they are ultimately
made up of individuals, and cannot be disassociated from them. Second,
they are tasked to safeguard the health of the projects and
communication channels that they own, and that means they should not
look away when norms are violated.

This is painful for everyone involved, and tends to be done only in
exceptional cases.  I take this as a challenge for us to develop
better ways of conflict resolution that are inclusive, consensual, and
respectful of one another. I also believe it's important not to let
the past hold us up forever. Individuals and their organizations
change and decisions should take that into account. The goal must be
to resolve controversies of that nature quickly and get back to an
intense and friendly competition of ideas in Scala.

