---
layout: blog-detail
post-type: blog
by: Paweł Marks, VirtusLab
title: Scala 3.1.2 released!
---

We are happy to announce the release of Scala 3.1.2. This new release brings a few significant improvements awaited by the community.

## Configurable Scala output version

First and foremost, after months of brainstorming and testing, we are bringing the possibility to configure the Scala output version. This means that compiler can now generate TASTy files and classfiles that are readable for the older minor versions of Scala. Moreover, the minimal version of the compiler that is able to read your compiled code is controlled by single setting.

If you are a library maintainer, you may have faced a dilemma, should you update the Scala version to 3.1 or stay on 3.0. On the one hand, updating would bring you all bug fixes and enhancements from the newest version of the compiler. On the other, all new releases of your library would be unusable for all the users that are, for some reason, stuck on Scala 3.0.

With Scala 3.1.2, this tradeoff is no more. Now you can set the Scala output version to previous language releases. For example, even when using 3.1.2 to compile your library, if you set your output to Scala 3.0, your library can be used by code compiled with Scala 3.0, 3.1, or any future version. All produced TASTy files and classfiles will be compatible with Scala 3.0 and newer.

While the flag itself is not marked as experimental, its role in the broader ecosystem of scala libraries is yet to be determined. We are eagerly awaiting feedback from the maintainers of the libraries. Hearing your opinions will allow us to choose the right strategy for supporting code compiled for previous scala versions so that we can find a balance between language development and burden on both compiler users and maintainers.

### Current support

You can set the Scala output version by using a new compiler flag named `-scala-output-version` with a minor release version as an argument. You may remember this flag as `-scala-target` or `-Xscala-release` in design discussions and unstable builds. Those names are not supported in the stable release.

Sbt, starting from version 1.7.0-M1, has a setting `scalaOutputVersion` that not only sets the compiler flag mentioned above, but also fixes which version of the standard library will be specified as your dependency. For example, specifying

```scala
ThisBuild / scalaVersion       := "3.1.2"
ThisBuild / scalaOutputVersion := "3.0.2"
```

you are using the latest version of the compiler, but your library can be used by code compiled with any Scala 3 version. Of course this also works with cross-compilation:

```scala
ThisBuild / scalaVersion := "3.1.2"
ThisBuild / crossScalaVersions := List("2.13.8", "3.1.2")
ThisBuild / scalaOutputVersion := {
  CrossVersion.partialVersion(scalaVersion.value) match {
    case Some((3, _)) => "3.0.2"
    case _ => scalaVersion.value
  }
}
```

### Changes to other compatibility flags

We realized that there is some confusion about current output compatibility flags, and adding a new one would only make it worse. So, we have decided to rename existing flags. `-release` is now `-java-output-version`, and `-Xtarget` is `-Xunchecked-java-output-version`. The old names are left as aliases for the sake of compatibility.

## Other improvements

- You can now pass `-Xmacro-settings` flag during the compilation to customize the behavior of macros in your code. This feature is still experimental.
  For example, you can compile following code with `-Xmacro-settings:present,key=value`:

  ```scala
  //> using options "-Xmacro-settings:present,key=value"

  import scala.quoted.*

  inline def customizable = ${ customizableImpl }

  def customizableImpl(using Quotes) =
    import quotes.reflect.*
    val settings = CompilationInfo.XmacroSettings

    val present    = settings.contains("present")       // true
    val notPresent = settings.contains("not-present")   // false
    val withValue  = settings.collectFirst {            // Some("value")
      case s"key=$value" => value
    }

    ??? // Do something fancy with your settings
  ```

- You can run `scala` command with `-e` flag to quickly execute a Scala statement from the command line.

  ```sh
    scala -e "println(22*38)"
  ```

  will print `836` on standard output and exit scala process.

- There are new optimizations in the typer that may results in significant speedups in some cases. You can find more information and benchmark results in [the related pull request](https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/pull/13637).

## Contributors

Thank you to all the contributors who made this release possible.

According to `git shortlog -sn --no-merges 3.1.1..3.1.2` these are:

```
    // TODO
```
