---
layout: blog-detail
category: blog
by: The Scala Center
title: "Scala Days 2025: Call for proposals"
---

Submit your talk to be part of Scala Days 2025! The Call for Proposals is officially open and will close on April 6th, 2025, at 11:30 pm GMT.

[Submit your talk](https://www.papercall.io/scaladays).

Join us for the 12th edition of Scala Days, the leading global event for Scala, by giving a presentation during the conference on August 19-21, 2025.
We are bringing a diverse community to Scala’s hometown of Lausanne, Switzerland to share and explore all the latest in Scala, functional programming, and software engineering.
As part of making a great program, we (the organizers) look to provide up-to-date and practical knowledge on Scala and surrounding technologies for software developers, software architects, team leads, community members, and researchers.

Whether you're a seasoned expert or a first-time speaker, we encourage you to submit your ideas and help shape this year’s program. Don't miss your chance to contribute to the Scala community — submit your proposal before April 6th 2025!

## Topics

Scala Days welcomes speakers and attendees of all experience levels, showcasing the diverse applications of Scala across sectors. Talks will run up to 45 minutes, followed by live Q&A sessions. Suggested topics for talk submissions include, but are not limited to:

### Foundations

- Functional programming
- Type systems
- Concurrency and parallelism
- Algorithms and performance

### Experience reports

- Industrial adoption
- Open source
- Teaching and Mentoring
- Community

### Libraries and applications

- Distributed systems
- Machine learning
- Big data
- Web development
- Game development
- Native applications

### Workflow

- Programming methodologies
- Cloud and deployment
- DevOps
- Security

### Tooling

- Compilers and virtual machines
- IDEs
- Testing frameworks
- Build tools
- LLM code assistance

### Other

- Hardware
- Networking

## Get inspired

Interested but not sure where to start? You can view previous talks on the Scala Days [YouTube Channel](https://www.youtube.com/@ScalaDaysConferences) and read previous talk abstracts from Scala Days [Madrid 2023](https://archives.scaladays.org/2023/madrid-2023/schedule.html) and [Seattle 2023](https://archives.scaladays.org/2023/seattle-2023/schedule.html).

If you need any assistance or have questions, please email [info@scaladays.org](mailto:info@scaladays.org).
