---
title: Your First Lines of Scala
layout: inner-page-no-masthead
includeTOC: true
---

## Your first lines of code

### The "Hello, world!" Program

As a first example, we use the standard "Hello, world!" program to demonstrate the use of the Scala tools without knowing too much about the language.

    object HelloWorld {
      def main(args: Array[String]): Unit = {
        println("Hello, world!")
      }
    }

The structure of this program should be familiar to Java programmers: it consists of the method `main` which prints out a friendly greeting to the standard output.

We assume that both the [Scala software]({{ site.baseurl }}/download) and the user environment are set up correctly. For example:

| Environment | Variable         | Value (example)
|:------------|:-----------------|:---------------
| Unix        | `$SCALA_HOME`    | `/usr/local/share/scala`
|             | `$PATH`          | `$PATH:$SCALA_HOME/bin`
| Windows     | `%SCALA_HOME%`   | `c:\Progra~1\Scala`
|             | `%PATH%`         | `%PATH%;%SCALA_HOME%\bin`


### Run it interactively!

The `scala` command starts an interactive shell where Scala expressions are interpreted interactively.

    > scala
    This is a Scala shell.
    Type in expressions to have them evaluated.
    Type :help for more information.

    scala> object HelloWorld {
        |   def main(args: Array[String]): Unit = {
        |     println("Hello, world!")
        |   }
        | }
    defined module HelloWorld

    scala> HelloWorld.main(Array())
    Hello, world!

    scala>:q
    >

The shortcut `:q` stands for the internal shell command `:quit` used to exit the interpreter.

### Compile it!

The `scalac` command compiles one (or more) Scala source file(s) and generates Java bytecode which can be executed on any [standard JVM](https://java.sun.com/docs/books/jvms/). The Scala compiler works similarly to `javac`, the Java compiler of the [Java SDK](https://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/index.html).

    > scalac HelloWorld.scala

By default `scalac` generates the class files into the current working directory. You may specify a different output directory using the `-d` option.

    > scalac -d classes HelloWorld.scala


### Execute it!

The `scala` command executes the generated bytecode with the appropriate options:

    > scala HelloWorld

`scala` allows us to specify command options, such as the `-classpath` (alias `-cp`) option:

    > scala -cp classes HelloWorld

The argument of the `scala` command has to be a top-level object. If that object extends trait scala.App, then all statements contained in that object will be executed; otherwise you have to add a method `main` which will act as the           entry point of your program.

Here is how the "Hello, world!" example looks like using the `App` trait:

    object HelloWorld extends App {
      println("Hello, world!")
    }

### Script it!

We may also run our example as a shell script or batch command (see the examples in the man pages of the `scala` command).

The [bash](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/) shell script `script.sh` containing the following Scala code (and shell preamble):

    #!/bin/sh
    exec scala "$0" "$@"
    !#

    object HelloWorld extends App {
      println("Hello, world!")
    }

can be run directly from the command shell:

    > ./script.sh

**Note**: We assume here that the file `script.sh` has execute permission and the search path for the `scala` command is specified in the `PATH` environment variable.
